i'd like to try something new
those of you who are able please stand
up
okay so i'm gonna name some names
when you hear a name that you don't
recognize you can't tell me anything
about them
i'd like you to take a seat and stay
seated
the last person standing we're going to
see what they know
okay all right
eric garner
mike brown
tamir rice
freddie gray
so those of you who are still standing
i'd like you to turn around and take a
look i'd say
half to most of the people are still
standing
so let's continue michelle cousseau
tanisha anderson
ara russer
megan hocketty
so we look around again there are about
four
people still standing and actually i'm
not going to put you on the spot i just
say that to encourage transparency so
you can be seated
so those of you who recognize the first
group of names know that these were
african americans who've been killed by
the police over the last
two and a half years what you may not
know is that the other list
is also african americans who
have been killed within the last two
years
only one thing distinguishes the names
that you know
from the names that you don't know
gender
so let me first let you know that
there's
nothing at all distinct about this
audience
that explains the pattern of recognition
that we've just seen
i've done this exercise dozens of times
around the country
i've done it to women's rights
organizations i've done it with civil
rights groups
i've done it with professors i've done
it with students
i've done it with psychologists i've
done it with sociologists
i've done it even with progressive
members of congress
and everywhere the awareness of the
level
of police violence that black women
experience
is exceedingly low
now it is surprising isn't it that this
would be the case
i mean there are two issues involved
here there's police violence against
african americans
and there's violence against women two
issues that have been talked about
a lot lately but when we think about
who is implicated by these problems
when we think about who's victimized by
these problems
the names of these black women never
come to mind
now communications experts tell us that
when facts do not fit with the available
frames
people have a difficult time
incorporating new facts
into their way of thinking about a
problem
these women's names have slipped through
our consciousness because
there are no frames for us to see them
no frames for us to remember them
no frames for us to hold them
as a consequence reporters don't lead
with them
policy don't think about them and
and politicians aren't encouraged or
demanded that
they speak to them now you might ask
well
why does a frame matter i mean after all
an issue that affects black people
and an issue that affects women wouldn't
that necessarily include
black people who are women and women who
are black people
well the simple answer is that this is a
trickle-down approach to social justice
and many times
it just doesn't work without frames that
allow us to see how social problems
impact
all the members of a targeted group many
will fall through the cracks of our
movements left to suffer
in virtual isolation
but it doesn't have to be this way
many years ago i began to use the term
intersectionality to deal with the fact
that many of our
social justice problems like racism and
sexism are
often overlapping creating
multiple levels of social injustice
now the experience that gave rise to
intersectionality was my chance
encounter
with a woman named emma degraffenreid
emma degraffenreid was an
african-american woman
a working wife and a mother i actually
read about emma's story from the pages
of a legal opinion
written by a judge who had dismissed
emma's claim
of race and gender discrimination
against a local
car manufacturing plant emma like
so many african-american women sought
better
employment for her family and for others
she wanted to create a better life
for her children and for her family but
she applied for a job
and she was not hired and she believed
that she was not hired because she was a
black woman
now the judge in question dismissed
emma suit and the argument for
dismissing the suit was
that the employer did hire african
americans
and the employer hired women
the real problem though that the judge
was not willing to acknowledge
was what emma was actually trying to say
that the african-americans that were
hired usually
for industrial jobs maintenance jobs
were all men and the women that were
hired usually for secretarial or
front office work were all white
only if the court was able to see how
these policies came together
would he be able to see the double
discrimination
that emma degraffenreid was facing
but the court refused to allow emma to
put
two causes of action together to tell
her story
because he believed that by allowing her
to do that
she would be able to have preferential
treatment she'd have an advantage
by being able to have two swings at the
bat
when african-american men and white
women only had one swing at the back
but of course neither african-american
men
or white women needed to combine a race
and gender discrimination claim
to tell the story of the discrimination
they were experiencing
why wasn't the real unfairness
law's refusal to protect
african-american women
simply because their experiences weren't
exactly the same
as white women and african-american men
rather than broadening the frame to
include
african-american women the court simply
tossed their case
completely out of court now
as a student of anti-discrimination law
as a feminist as an anti-racist
i was struck by this case it it felt to
me
like injustice squared
so so first of all black women weren't
allowed to work at the plant second of
all
the court doubled down on this exclusion
by
making it legally inconsequential
and to boot there was no name for this
problem
and we all know that where there's no
name for a problem
you can't see a problem and when you
can't see a problem you pretty much
can't solve it
many years later i'd i'd come to
recognize that the problem
that emma was facing was a framing
problem
the frame that the court was using to
see gender discrimination
or to see race discrimination was
partial
and it was distorting for me the the
challenge that i faced was
trying to figure out whether there was
an alternative
narrative a prism that would allow us to
see
emma's dilemma a prison that would allow
us to rescue her
from the cracks in the law that would
allow
judges to see her story
so it occurred to me maybe a a
simple analogy to an intersection
might allow judges to better see emma's
dilemma so if we think about this
intersection the
roads to the intersection would be the
way that
the workforce was structured by
race and by gender and then the traffic
in those roads would be the hiring
policies and and the
other practices that ran through those
roads
now because emma was both
black and female she was positioned
precisely where those roads overlapped
experiencing the simultaneous
impact of the company's gender
and race traffic
the law the love is like that ambulance
that shows up
and is ready to treat emma only if it
can be shown
that she was harmed on the race road or
on the gender road but not where
those roads intersected
so what do you call being impacted by
multiple forces and then abandon
to fend for yourself intersectionality
seemed to do it for me
i would go on to learn that
african-american women
like other women of color like other
socially marginalized people
all over the world were facing all kinds
of dilemmas and challenges
as a consequence of intersectionality
intersections of race and and gender
of heterosexism transphobia xenophobia
ableism all of these social
dynamics come together and create
challenges that are sometimes quite
unique
but in the same way that
intersectionality
raised our awareness to the way that
black women
live their lives it also
exposes the tragic circumstances
under which african-american women die
police violence against black women
is very real the level of violence that
black women
face is such that it's not surprising
that some of them do not survive their
encounters with police
black girls as young as seven
great-grandmothers as old as 95
have been killed by the police they've
been killed in their living rooms
in their bedrooms they've been killed in
their cars
they've been killed on the street
they've been killed in front of
their parents and they've been killed in
front of their children
they have been shot to death they have
been stomped
to death they have been suffocated to
death
they have been manhandled to death
they have been tasered to death
they've been killed when they've called
for help
they've been killed when they were alone
and they've been killed when they were
with others
they have been killed shopping while
black
driving while black having a mental
disability
while black having a domestic
disturbance while black
they've even been killed being homeless
while black they've been killed talking
on the cell phone
laughing with friends sitting in a car
reported as stolen
and making a u-turn in front of the
white house
with an infant strapped in the backseat
of the car
why don't we know these stories
why is it that their lost lives
don't generate the same amount of media
attention and communal outcry
as the lost lives of their fallen
brothers
it's time for a change
so what can we do
in 2014 the african-american
policy forum began to demand that we say
her name at rallies
at protests at conferences
at meetings anywhere and everywhere
that state violence against black bodies
is being discussed
but saying her name is is is not enough
we
have to be willing to do more we have to
be willing to
bear witness to bear witness to
the often painful realities that we
would just rather
not confront the everyday violence and
humiliation
that many black women have had to face
black women across color age
gender expression sexuality and ability
so we have the opportunity right now
bearing in mind that some of the images
that i'm about to share with you may be
triggering for some
to collectively bear witness to some
of this violence we're going to hear
the voice of the phenomenal abbey dobson
and as we sit with these women
some who've experienced violence and
some who have
not survived them we have an
opportunity to reverse what happened at
the beginning
of this talk when we could not stand for
these women because we
did not know their names
so at the end of this clip there's going
to be a roll call
several black women's names will come up
i'd like those of you who are able to
join us
in saying these names as loud
as you can randomly disorderly
let's create a cacophony of sound
to represent our intention to hold these
women
up to sit with them to bear witness to
them
to bring them into the light
say
her name
same
say
her name
i'm
for all the names i'll
never know
as i said at the beginning
we can't see a problem
we can't fix a problem together
we've come together to bear witness to
these women's lost lives
but the time now is to move from
mourning and grief to action
and transformation this is something
that we can do it's up to us
thank you for joining us thank you